Add UCX DGX draft (#28)
dask/dask-blog: _posts/2019-05-31-ucx-dgx.md

---
{% include JB/setup %}

*This post is about experimental and rapidly changing software.
Code examples in this post should not be relied upon to work in the future.*

Executive Summary
-----------------

This post talks about connecting UCX, a high performance networking library, to
Dask, a parallel Python library, to accelerate communication-heavy workloads,
particularly when using GPUs.

Additionally, we do this work on a DGX, a high-end multi-CPU multi-GPU machine
with a complex internal network.  Working in this context was good to force
improvements in setting up Dask in heterogeneous situations targetting
different network cards, CPU sockets, GPUs, and so on..

Moviation
---------

Many distributed computing workloads are communication-bound.
This is common in cases like the following:

1.  Dataframe joins
2.  Machine learning algorithms
3.  Rearranging arrays
4.  ...

Communication also increasingly becomes a bottlenck when our computation
becomes faster, such as increasingly the case when we use GPUs for computing.

Historically high performance communication was only commonly available using
MPI, or with very custom codes.  We were trying to get close to the

> communicatino bandwidth of MPI while still maintaining the ease of

Reviewer: communicatino  -> communication

The [OpenUCX](http://www.openucx.org/) project provides a uniform API around
various high performance networking libraries like Infiniband, traditional
networking protocols like TCP/shared memory, and GPU-specific protocols like
NVLink.  It is a layer beneath something like OpenMPI (the main user of OpenUCX
today) that figures out which networking system to use.

<img src="http://www.openucx.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/ucx-architecture-1024x505.jpg"
     width="100%" />

Python users today don't have much access to these network libraries, except
through MPI, which is sometimes not ideal.

This lead us to create [UCX-Py](https://github.com/Akshay-Venkatesh/ucx-py/)
(where by "us" I primarily mean
[Akshay Venkatesh](https://github.com/Akshay-Venkatesh/) (UCX, NVIDIA) and
[Tom Augspurger](https://tomaugspurger.github.io/) (Dask, Pandas, Anaconda),
and [Ben Zaitlen](https://github.com/quasiben/) (NVIDIA, RAPIDS, Dask)).
UCX-Py is a Python wrapper around the UCX C library, which provides a Pythonic
API, both with blocking syntax appropriate for traditional HPC programs, as
well as a non-blocking `async/await` syntax for more concurrent programs (like
Dask).

> Akshay gave a great talk about UCX at the GPU Technology Conference 2019.

Reviewer: Maybe a little more introductory phrasing here:
> For more information on UCX I recommend watching Akshay's UCX talk at ....

Reviewer 2: And add the [talk link](https://on-demand-gtc.gputechconf.com/gtcnew/sessionview.php?sessionName=s9679-ucx-python%3a+a+flexible+communication+library+for+python+applications)

---
layout: widepost
title: Experiments in High Performance Networking with UCX and DGX
author: Matthew Rocklin
draft: true
tags: [python,scipy]
theme: twitter
---
{% include JB/setup %}

*This post is about experimental and rapidly changing software.
Code examples in this post should not be relied upon to work in the future.*

Executive Summary
-----------------

This post talks about connecting UCX, a high performance networking library, to
Dask, a parallel Python library, to accelerate communication-heavy workloads,
particularly when using GPUs.

Additionally, we do this work on a DGX, a high-end multi-CPU multi-GPU machine
with a complex internal network.  Working in this context was good to force

> improvements in setting up Dask in heterogeneous situations targetting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
improvements in setting up Dask in heterogeneous situations targeting
```

different network cards, CPU sockets, GPUs, and so on..

> Moviation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Motivation
```

---------

Many distributed computing workloads are communication-bound.
This is common in cases like the following:

1.  Dataframe joins
2.  Machine learning algorithms
3.  Rearranging arrays
4.  ...

> Communication also increasingly becomes a bottlenck when our computation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Communication also increasingly becomes a bottleneck when our computation
```

becomes faster, such as increasingly the case when we use GPUs for computing.

Historically high performance communication was only commonly available using

> MPI, or with very custom codes.  We were trying to get close to the

Reviewer 3: I incorrectly read "We were trying" as "We tried and gave up...". Maybe something like "Our goal is to approach the high communicate performance of MPI, while retaining the programmability and accessibility of a dynamic system like Dask".

communicatino bandwidth of MPI while still maintaining the ease of
programmability and accessiblity of a dynamic system like Dask.

UCX, Python, and Dask
---------------------

To do this we wrapped up UCX with Python and then connected that to Dask.

The [OpenUCX](http://www.openucx.org/) project provides a uniform API around

> various high performance networking libraries like Infiniband, traditional

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
various high performance networking libraries like InfiniBand, traditional
```

networking protocols like TCP/shared memory, and GPU-specific protocols like
NVLink.  It is a layer beneath something like OpenMPI (the main user of OpenUCX

> today) that figures out which networking system to use.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be better to specify that, despite support for TCP, shared memory, etc., the current focus is only on InfiniBand and NVLink.

Reviewer 4: In what sense, from RAPIDS standpoint, from NVIDIA's standpoint, or from OpenUCX's standpoint? It's also worth noting issue ( https://github.com/Akshay-Venkatesh/ucx-py/issues/76 ).

Author: I think that we're pretty committed to TCP.  It just doesn't work well yet.  I'll add this in the future work section.

<img src="http://www.openucx.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/ucx-architecture-1024x505.jpg"
     width="100%" />

Python users today don't have much access to these network libraries, except

> through MPI, which is sometimes not ideal.

Reviewer 4: Echoing the point raised from someone internally, it would be good to spell out what the challenges with MPI are as well as what they are from the Dask standpoint. This motivates much of the discussion here.

This lead us to create [UCX-Py](https://github.com/Akshay-Venkatesh/ucx-py/)
(where by "us" I primarily mean
[Akshay Venkatesh](https://github.com/Akshay-Venkatesh/) (UCX, NVIDIA) and
[Tom Augspurger](https://tomaugspurger.github.io/) (Dask, Pandas, Anaconda),
and [Ben Zaitlen](https://github.com/quasiben/) (NVIDIA, RAPIDS, Dask)).
UCX-Py is a Python wrapper around the UCX C library, which provides a Pythonic
API, both with blocking syntax appropriate for traditional HPC programs, as
well as a non-blocking `async/await` syntax for more concurrent programs (like
Dask).

Akshay gave a great talk about UCX at the GPU Technology Conference 2019.

<video width="560" height="315" controls>
    <source src="https://developer.download.nvidia.com/video/gputechconf/gtc/2019/video/S9679/s9679-ucx-python-a-flexible-communication-library-for-python-applications.mp4"
            type="video/mp4">
</video>

We then [extended Dask communications to optionally use UCX](https://github.com/dask/distributed/blob/master/distributed/comm/ucx.py).

> If you have UCX and UCX-Py installed then you can use the `ucx://` protocol in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you have UCX and UCX-Py installed, then you can use the `ucx://` protocol in
```

addresses or the `--protocol ucx` flag when starting things up, something like
this.

```
$ dask-scheduler --protocol ucx
Scheduler started at ucx://127.0.0.1:8786

$ dask-worker ucx://127.0.0.1:8786
```

```python
>>> from dask.distributed import Client
>>> client = Client('ucx://127.0.0.1:8786')
```

Performance Differences
-----------------------

On a GPU using NVLink we can get somewhere between 5-10 GB/s throughput between
pairs of GPUs.  On a CPU this drops down to 1-2 GB/s (which seems well below
optimal).

> These speeds can affect all Dask workloads (array, dataframe, xarray, ML, ...)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These speeds can affect all Dask workloads (array, dataframe, xarray, ML, ...),
```

> when the proper hardware is present though other bottlenecks, like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but when the proper hardware is present, other bottlenecks may occur,
```

> serialization when dealing with text or JSON-like data, may occur

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
such as serialization when dealing with text or JSON-like data.
```

GPU4	NV2	SYS	SYS	SYS	 X 	NV1	NV1	NV2	SYS	PIX	SYS	PHB	20-39,60-79
GPU5	SYS	NV2	SYS	SYS	NV1	 X 	NV2	NV1	SYS	PIX	SYS	PHB	20-39,60-79
GPU6	SYS	SYS	NV1	SYS	NV1	NV2	 X 	NV2	SYS	PHB	SYS	PIX	20-39,60-79
GPU7	SYS	SYS	SYS	NV1	NV2	NV1	NV2	 X 	SYS	PHB	SYS	PIX	20-39,60-79
mlx5_0	PIX	PIX	PHB	PHB	SYS	SYS	SYS	SYS	 X 	SYS	PHB	SYS
mlx5_2	SYS	SYS	SYS	SYS	PIX	PIX	PHB	PHB	SYS	 X 	SYS	PHB
mlx5_1	PHB	PHB	PIX	PIX	SYS	SYS	SYS	SYS	PHB	SYS	 X 	SYS
mlx5_3	SYS	SYS	SYS	SYS	PHB	PHB	PIX	PIX	SYS	PHB	SYS	 X

Legend:

  X    = Self
  SYS  = Connection traversing PCIe as well as the SMP interconnect between NUMA nodes (e.g., QPI/UPI)
  NODE = Connection traversing PCIe as well as the interconnect between PCIe Host Bridges within a NUMA node
  PHB  = Connection traversing PCIe as well as a PCIe Host Bridge (typically the CPU)
  PXB  = Connection traversing multiple PCIe switches (without traversing the PCIe Host Bridge)
  PIX  = Connection traversing a single PCIe switch
  NV#  = Connection traversing a bonded set of # NVLinks
  ```

The DGX was originally designed for deep learning
applications.  The complex network infrastructure above can be well used by
specialized NVIDIA networking libraries like

> [NCCL](https://developer.nvidia.com/nccl), which knows to route things

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[NCCL](https://developer.nvidia.com/nccl), which knows how to route things
```

correctly, but is something of a challenge for other more general purpose

> systems like Dask to adapt to (or at least, I found it a challenge).

Reviewer 4: I'd probably just cut the "(or at least, I found it a challenge)" bit. That's just me though. 🙂

    interface: str
        The interface prefix for the infiniband networking cards.  This is
        often "ib"` or "bond".  We will add the numeric suffix 0,1,2,3 as
        appropriate.  Defaults to "ib".
    dashboard_address: str
        The address for the scheduler dashboard.  Defaults to ":8787".
    CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES: str
        String like ``"0,1,2,3"`` or ``[0, 1, 2, 3]`` to restrict activity to
        different GPUs

    Examples
    --------
    >>> from dask_cuda import DGX
    >>> from dask.distributed import Client
    >>> cluster = DGX(interface='ib')
    >>> client = Client(cluster)
    """
    if CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES is None:
        CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES = os.environ.get("CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES", "0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7")
    if isinstance(CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES, str):
        CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES = CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES.split(",")
    CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES = list(map(int, CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES))
    memory_limit = TOTAL_MEMORY / 8

    spec = {
        i: {
            "cls": Nanny,
            "options": {
                "env": {
                    "CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES": cuda_visible_devices(
                        ii, CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES
                    ),

>                     # 'UCX_NET_DEVICES': 'mlx5_%d:1' % (i // 2)

Reviewer 4: Should we keep this comment? If so, could we explain what it is here for with another comment?

still assumes uniform bandwidths between workers.  We've started to make small
steps towards changing this, but we're not there yet (this will be useful as
well for people that want to think about in-rack or cross-data-center
deployments).

As usual, in solving a highly specific problem, we were able to solve a number
of lingering general features, which then made our specific problem easy to
write down.

Future Work
-----------

-   **Routing within complex networks**:
    If you restrict yourself to four of the eight GPUs in a DGX, you can get 5-10 GB/s
    between pairs of GPUs.  For some workloads this can be significant.  It
    makes the system feel much more like a single unit than a bunch of isolated
    machines.

    However we still can't get great performance across the whole DGX because
    there are many GPU-pairs that are not connected by NVLink, and so we get 10x
    slower speeds.  These dominate communication costs if you naively try to use
    the full DGX.

    This might be solved either by:

    1.  Teaching Dask to avoid these communications
    2.  Teaching UCX to route communications like these through a chain of
        multiple NVLink connections

>     3.  Avoiding complex networks altogether.  Apparently newer systems like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    3.  Avoiding complex networks altogether. Newer systems like the DGX-2 use
```

>         the DGX-2 use NVSwitch, which is more uniform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        NVSwitch, which provides uniform connectivity, with each GPU connected
        to every other GPU.
```

> -   **CPU:** We can get 1-2 GB/s across infiniband, which isn't bad, but also

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   **CPU:** We can get 1-2 GB/s across InfiniBand, which isn't bad, but also
```

    wasn't the full 5-8 GB/s that we was hoping for.  This deserves more serious
    profiling to determine what is going wrong.  The current guess is that this

>     has to do with memory allocations.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a sample that I can use to reproduce/benchmark this? I would like to check that, we could try something less burdensome, such as using Cython, like the example I wrote in [this gist](https://gist.github.com/pentschev/cf616610646c9de5ab08e4dc130bd8b3).

Author: The example above should work if you drop the `RandomState=cupy.RandomState` parameter to `da.RandomState(...)`

Author: Something the the following might also be helpful and a bit simpler.

```python
async with DGX(asynchronous=True, CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=[0, 1]) as cluster:
    async with Client(cluster, asynchronous=True, direct_to_workers=True) as client:
        x = np.random.random(100000000)
        future = await client.scatter(x, hash=False)
        y = await future
```

    ```python
    In [1]: %time _ = b'0' * 1000000000  # 1 GB
    CPU times: user 248 ms, sys: 223 ms, total: 472 ms
    Wall time: 470 ms   # <<----- Around 2 GB/s.  Slower than I expected
    ```

    Probably we're just doing something dumb here.

-   **Package UCX:** Currently I'm building the UCX and UCX-Py libraries from
    source (see appendix below for instructions).  Ideally these would become
    conda packages.  [John Kirkham](https://github.com/jakirkham) (Conda Forge,
    NVIDIA, Dask) is taking a look at this along with the UCX developers from
    Mellanox.

> -   **Learn Heterogeneous Bandwidths:** In order to make good scheduling

Reviewer 3: Do we have a distributed issue about this?

Author: https://github.com/dask/distributed/issues/2743

./autogen.sh
mkdir build
cd build
../configure --prefix=$CONDA_PREFIX --enable-debug --with-cuda=$CUDA_HOME --enable-mt --disable-cma CPPFLAGS="-I//usr/local/cuda-9.2/include"
make -j install

# Verify
ucx_info -d
which ucx_info  # verify that this is in the conda environment

# Verify that we see NVLink speeds
ucx_perftest -t tag_bw -m cuda -s 1048576 -n 1000 & ucx_perftest dgx15 -t tag_bw -m cuda -s 1048576 -n 1000
```

Set up UCX-Py
-------------

```
git clone git@github.com:Akshay-Venkatesh/ucx-py
cd ucx-py

export UCX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX
make install
```

Set up Dask
-----------

```
git clone git@github.com:dask/dask.git
cd dask
pip install -e .
cd ..
```

```
git clone git@github.com:dask/distributed.git
cd distributed
pip install -e .
cd ..
```

Optionally set up cupy
----------------------

```
pip install cupy-cuda92==6
```

Optionally set up cudf
----------------------

```
conda install -c rapidsai-nightly -c conda-forge -c numba cudf dask-cudf cudatoolkit=9.2
```

Optionally set up JupyterLab
----------------------------

```
conda install ipykernel jupyterlab nb_conda_kernels
```

For the Dask dashboard

```
pip install dask_labextension

> jupyter labextension install dask-labextension

Reviewer 5: User will need `nodejs` to install the lab extensions.

     width="100%" /></a>

Python users today don't have much access to these network libraries, except
through MPI, which is sometimes not ideal. ([Try searching for "infiniband" on
PyPI.](https://pypi.org/search/?q=infiniband))

> This led us to create [UCX-Py](https://github.com/Akshay-Venkatesh/ucx-py/)

Reviewer: ucx-py url can be changed to https://github.com/rapidsai/ucx-py though the redirect will also work

Author: Thanks!  Resolved.

```python
import cupy
import dask
import dask.array
from dask.distributed import Client, wait
from dask_cuda import DGX

# Define DGX cluster and client
cluster = DGX(CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=[4,5,6,7])
client = Client(cluster)

# Create random data
rs = dask.array.random.RandomState(RandomState=cupy.random.RandomState)
x = rs.random((1000000, 1000), chunks=(10000, 1000))
x = x.persist()

# Perform distributed SVD
u, s, v = dask.array.linalg.svd(x)
u, s, v = dask.persist(u, s, v)
_ = wait([u, s, v])
```

By defining a DGX cluster, and therefore enabling UCX, the overall communication time is reduced by almost an order of magnitude. To produce the task-stream figures below, the benchmark was run on a DGX-1 with `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=[0,1,2,3]`.  It is clear that the red task bars, corresponding to inter-process communication, are significantly compressed. 

**Before UCX**:

> <iframe src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rjzamora/raw-host/master/task_stream_lcc_dgx16.html" width="800" height="400"></iframe>

Author: FYI for this to work the HTML needs to be served somewhere.  I had to put these plots files into a `gh-pages` branch so that github would host them, so that the user's browser would run the javascript contained within.

Reviewer 5: Right, I forgot about this - The files are also hosted at `https://rjzamora.github.io/raw-host/<file-name>` now, but thanks for taking care of it!
